[TN] Namespacing by Separation of Concern (#165)
apollographql/docs: src/content/technotes/TN0009-namespace-by-separation-of-concern.mdx

---
title: Namespace by Separation of Concern

> id: TN0009

Author: Updated to TN0012

tags: [schema, best practices]
---

In most GraphQL API’s queries and mutations are organized in a flat structure. The GitHub GraphQL API has approximately 200 root level operations! Even with tools like Apollo Explorer, navigating and understanding these graphs can be difficult.

> Namespaces provide a way to organize our top level mutations and queries into separate concerns. They should be applied by using type names as a prefix with some descriptive suffix.

Reviewer: Might want to consistent call them "root-level" or "root fields" and not "top level". Especially since the spec calls them "root fields" consistently.

> Namespaces provide a way to organize our top level mutations and queries into separate concerns. They should be applied by using type names as a prefix with some descriptive suffix.

Reviewer 2: ah yeah good call

```graphql
type CommentsMutations {
	create(comment: CommentInput!): Comment!
	delete(id: ID!): Comment!
}
```

Then, we can add a single top-level namespaced type which wraps other mutations.

```graphql
type Mutation {
	users: UsersMutations!
	comments: CommentsMutations!
}
```

The same can be done for queries for both `Users` and `Comments` .

```graphql
type UsersQueries {
	all: [User!]!
}

type CommentsQueries {
	byUser(user: ID!): [Comment!]!
}

# Add a single top-level namespace-type which wraps other queries
type Query {
	users: UsersQueries!
	comments: CommentsQueries!
}
```

In the client, your operations are written in a nested formatted, which still provides context on what you are querying for or mutating.

```graphql
mutation CreateNewUser($userProfile: UserProfileInput!) {
	users {
		create(profile: $userProfile) {
			id
			firstName
			lastName
		}
	}
}

query FetchAllUsers {
	users {
		all {
			id
			firstName
			lastName
		}
	}
}
```

> 💡 Note that you don’t have to repeat the text “user” in the field names anymore in the `UsersQueries` type because we already know all these operations are applied to `Users`.

## Namespaces for Serial Mutations

> One big difference between top level queries and mutations is that mutations are run in serial and not in parallel.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Unlike all other fields in a GraphQL operation, the top-level fields of the `Mutation` type must be resolved _serially_ instead of in parallel. This can help prevent two mutation fields from interacting with the same data simultaneously, which might cause a race condition.
```

```graphql
mutation DoTwoThings {
  one { 
    success 
  }

>   # Will not `two` resolver run until after `one` completes.
>   # Will not run at all if `one` errors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  # The `two` field is not resolved until after `one` is resolved.
  # It is not resolved at all if resolving `one` results in an error.
```

  two { 
    success 
  }
}
```

> While the benefits of this feature are dubious (you probably want to use a saga orchestrator in a single mutation if you want some kind of transactional consistency), you might still want these semantics. With namespaces, mutations are moved from the top level to nested fields so the fields will run in parallel:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With namespaces, your mutation fields that actually modify data are no longer root-level fields (instead, your namespace objects are). Because of this, the mutation fields _are_ resolved in parallel. In many systems, this doesn't present an issue (for example, you probably want to use another mechanism in your mutation resolvers to ensure transactional consistency, such as a saga orchestrator).
```

```graphql
mutation DoTwoNestedThings(
  $createInput: CreateReviewInput!
  $deleteInput: DeleteReviewInput!
) {
  reviews {
    create(input: $createInput) {
      success
    }

> 		# will run in parallel with `create`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    # Is resolved in parallel with `create`
```

    delete(input: $deleteInput) {
      success
    }
  }
}
```

> But you can still use client-side aliases to create two root fields which will run in serial:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you want to guarantee serial execution in a particular operation, you can use client-side aliases to create two root fields that are resolved serially:
```

Reviewer 2: (Also, this is neat!) 😄

```graphql
mutation DoTwoNestedThingsInSerial(
  $createInput: CreateReviewInput!
  $deleteInput: DeleteReviewInput!
) {
  a: reviews {
    create(input: $createInput) {
      success
    }
  }

> 	# will run after `a` completes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  # Is resolved serially after `a` is resolved
```
